Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host as always Ricard Lobs. And
today I'm joined by Doctor Michael Price. He is
senior lecturer in psychology at Brunel University London. And
today we're focusing mostly on the bio cultural evolution
of religio spirituality and also the topic of universal
Darwinism. We're going to get into that. So Michael,
welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thanks. It's great to be here. Thanks for inviting
me.
So perhaps tell us first uh because you identify
yourself as uh an evolutionary psychologist, right? Is that
right? Uh And so, uh as an evolutionary psychologist,
how did you get interested in a topic like
religious spirituality? What got you there?
Yeah. Um Well, I, I wasn't, it wasn't my
main topic originally, my main focus as a phd
student at UC Santa Barbara uh was more in
the evolution of cooper operation. Um But I've always
been interested in sort of um moral systems, the
evolution of moral systems. Um And so sort of
uh yeah, iii I can't say exactly what led
me to, to religion. Um And it was fairly,
you know, kind of a mid career shift of
focus a little bit. But, um, uh, I think
I was getting just a little bit, um, uh,
you know, um, ready for some, a new source
of inspiration in my, in my academic career. So,
you know, early on I was just, you know,
on fire with enthusiasm for evolutionary psychology and moral
psychology. And then I thought, like, well, maybe I've
gone about as far as I can And um
you know, the nice thing about being at a,
at a UK University, in contrast with some more
high pressure us universities is you do have a
little more time and space to kind of explore
new, new areas. And so for a while, I
just sort of immersed myself in this new topic
and how could I approach it in a way
that it hadn't been approached before? Sort of what,
what are the gaps in our evolutionary understanding of
religion? And I started to think there were some
pretty significant gaps and that I might have something
to say about those. And um then a few
years ago, uh a, a good friend of mine
and a close colleague, Dominic Johnson University of Oxford,
uh invited me to, to kind of co-lead this
um this reg grant program on the evolution of
science and religion as meaning making systems, which enabled
Dominic and I to pursue our own research, but
also to distribute um eight or 17 reg grants
to, to other researchers around the world. Uh So
I just got increasingly immersed in this topic to
the point where now it's pretty much the the
center of my gravity, a center of gravity in
terms of my research interests,
you mentioned the term meaning making there related to
science and religion. What does meaning making mean in
this context?
Uh Well, I think it's, it's simply, you know,
when, when the events and experiences that uh that,
you know, we encounter throughout our lives, how do
we make sense of those? Um And you know,
how do we attribute sort of the significance of,
of events? Um IS that so if you just
want to sort of centralize it, maybe from a
scientific perspective, we try and say there's some kind
of, you know, physical explanation, some kind of causal
explanation. And even if I'm not aware of what
it is, it's, it's sort of we can break
it down in the materialistic terms, whereas a religious
perspective might be more oriented towards sort of some
higher plan, some higher purpose that isn't necessarily uh
something we can collect empirical evidence about even in,
in principle. So, um they're just, they're often contrasted,
especially in the western world um uh as, as
opposite approaches, you know, of, of ways of making
sense of the world. So do you take sides
science versus religion? Um It's not really the way
we're approaching it. I think the way we're approaching
it is sort of these two alternate ways that
people use uh for solving problems, uh specific sets
of problems in their lives. Um So, yeah,
and what would be some of those problems? Because
I was wondering here when it comes to religion,
I mean, we can get also into that specifically
because I've also already had tons of interviews on
the show with cognitive scientists of religion for example.
But when it comes to religion, the of problems
uh socially, morally and others that it allows for
us to solve, let's say, are more or less
obvious. But when it comes to science, what are
the kinds of problems that you are alluding to
here?
Well, I think with science, it's, it's pretty straightforward
that, I mean, the scientific method is a uh
an approach to producing uh objective knowledge that cannot
be beat. I mean, it's, it's, I think it's
really proved itself over the past uh as it's,
as it's evolved culturally over the past uh centuries,
relatively new invention. I mean, compared to so there
are plenty of sort of pre scientific societies, but
there are no like societies we would consider pre
religious. So science is really, you know, pretty, it's,
it's, it's pretty straight story can be interpreted as
a, an invention that humans have created for the
generation of objective knowledge. Um uh And then so,
and then, and that, you know, that, that utility
can be applied to basically an infinite number of
problems we might face, right, that um and trying
to control our environments and lives. Uh WHEREAS with
religion, um so there's different approaches to, to. So
as soon as you talk about problem solving and
you're talking about evolution, you're talking about adaptations because
adaptations are problem solving devices. Um Like a biological,
genetically encoded adaptation uh has been selected by evolution
because it's particularly good at solving some adaptive problem
related to ie related to survival and reproduction or
set of adaptive problems. Um So, when people talk
about the evolution of religion, often, I think you
may have been alluding to this a little bit
before. They, they often talk about cooper and social
coordinations and almost like a, a cultural group level
problems. And they say it not so much psychological
religiosity but religion as a as a cultural attribute,
um we've tried, we've tended to approach it religiosity
um as a psychological and individual level approach to
interpreting events and experiences in your life that you
so that it's a kind of bias that allows
you to interpret these events in a way that
solves problems for you. And the kinds of problems
we focused on are problems related to dealing. Well,
essentially uh uh finding a source of motivation in
the face of adversity. Um So a source of
especially like optimism and sense of purpose. Um And
these are mo widely regarded by in psychology as
sort of motivational systems or motivational mechanisms that keep
you motivated to persist in trying to achieve strive
for adaptive goals. So the kinds of problems that
we focused on Dom and myself um have been
those kinds of problems related to motivation uh and,
and solving adoptive problems. And when we say in
the face of adversity, we don't just mean say
you're starving to death or you're uh you know,
like a real existential crisis or something. But every
day adversity, I mean, every day we face, you
know, problems about uh you know, being motivated um
and, and sort of persisting in your goals and,
and not being too depressed to, to sort of
carry on and that kind of thing.
And when it comes to science specifically, do you
think that the sort of adaptation is perspective that
you can apply to religion, you can also apply
to science? Because I was just thinking that perhaps
the kinds of um cognitive frameworks that we bring
into science, theoretical perspectives, the way we approach knowledge
production tend to be, tend to be very counterintuitive.
So would that also have to do uh with
adaptation is in any way? I mean, do we
have any sort of adapted, evolved adaptations that predisposes
in any way to doing science or is that
sort of, uh um I don't know if we
could call it a secondary trade that is more
the result of cultural evolution or something like that?
Yeah, I mean, I think we certainly have kind
of adaptation, proto scientific predispositions. Um YOU know, um
where certainly, uh you know, human ancestors uh in
the environment which we evolved were doing something like
science when they were through trial and error discovered
a way to make a better, you know, uh
arrow, arrow point or, or tool of some kind
or way of forging whatever. So, I think, yeah,
we have the ways of sort of uh acquiring
knowledge for sure and, and, and having expectations about
what might work and then having those falsified. Um
And then, so moving on. So, yeah, I think
there's this rudimentary, certainly we have the sort of
adaptive uh machinery in place. And then, like you,
like you say, I think the scientific method in
a formal sense is simply the, the cultural elaboration
or almost amplification and, and, and um formalizing those
processes and saying here's what really works and here's
uh yeah, we have these adaptations for generating and
acquiring knowledge, but we also have adaptations that make
us often very bad at, at discerning the empirical
truth because we're such biased creatures and we have
our own subjective interest and we have our own
often, you know, interest in lying or misrepresenting the
truth um or for, for whatever reason, um we
have all kinds of inbuilt biases that we really
need to often it's an uphill battle to overcome
those. So, but with a formal scientific method that
says, you know, here, you have this hypothesis and
you try to falsify it and you know, um
it's, it's essential uh for keeping us sort of
on the straight and narrow when it comes to
the production of, of objective knowledge. Um Now, so
I, I, what was the rest of your question
there?
Uh I, I mean, basically, just to reformulate some
of what I said, I was trying to remember
the exact terms that people like, for example, David
Sri using their work because he has two very
uh interesting terms when he, when he mentions basically
uh core knowledge that is intuitive biology, intuitive physics,
and intuitive psychology, or folk psychology, biology, and physics.
Because that's what we are intuitively predisposed to thinking
about things in the world, about other people, about
other animals and plants and so on. But then
when, and that would connect in a way, at
least according to the work of some people out
there that would connect to religion directly. But then
when it comes to science, there's reps one further
step that we need to take because the way
we understand, for example, physics, scientifically, biology, scientifically, psychology,
scientifically, uh I mean, in many ways is very
counterintuitive and detached from that sort of core knowledge.
Oh yeah. Right. So I, that was something I
was trying to allude to, to.
Yeah. Um So I, I guess I would say
I would characterize scientific method or science as a
cultural adaptation. Um But it's also a by-product of
uh you know, pre-existing adaptations that, that we can
use um often effectively without in the absence of
a formal scientific method, often effectively uh to, to,
to, to generate knowledge. Um But we've also found
that if we really formalize that process and we
just talk about forget about our, our subjective biases,
we just, we have a theory, we have predictions
that would either falsify or support the theory. Um
Once we formalize that method, then we were able
to make all kinds of crazy discoveries that turn
out to be true in the scientific sense. But
that are entirely counterintuitive, right about like particle physics
and how a particle can tell a context another
particle or another system. It's has a superposition where
it's all everywhere at once or you know, particles
that can tunnel through solid matter things that aren't
just counterintuitive to us. But are they seem impossible
like any right thinking rational person is going to
say that's impossible, you know, that's. So the scientific
method has taken us building on these adaptations that
were much more intuitive. I think it's taken us
far beyond um the limits of our, of our,
of our intuition and of our, you know, we're
evolved to deal with the universe at the, at
the scale that, that, that we live in, not
at the scale of, you know, atomic physics. So
um I think that, yeah, the scientific method has,
it's, it's kind of everything is the result of
adaptations, you have to start with adaptive psychology. Um,
BUT it could be seen as, as, as a
by product and elaboration of those adaptations that has
been allowed us to sort of travel far beyond
their limitations. Um And just with religion, I think
it's, it's potentially a similar thing, but it's just
dealing with a different set of problems that are
very important to people. Um, I mean, there are,
there are, there are people who have interests beyond
just generating objective knowledge and people have an interest
in issues for which there is no empirically right
or wrong answer. So for example, we're talking about
optimism a lot in, in our studies and whether
you're optimistic about uh the future or not, there's
no right or right, right or wrong answer about,
you know, should you be optimistic or not? Because
it's, it's, it's, it's an expectation about the future
and there's no way of answering whether you're right
or wrong until the future. So there's no real
truth value assigned to optimism. Nevertheless, um optimism is
associated with all kinds of survival benefits. Um And
uh and uh it's associated with more successful and,
and goal striving, goal achievement, et cetera. So it
has certainly really tangible important repercussions for survival and
reproduction, but it has nothing to do with whether
you're objectively right or wrong. Um Like a lot
of our biases. I mean, they're often wrong, in
fact, like we are, evidence suggests that people, human
nature does have this optimism bias that is in,
in sort of psychologically he healthy people. It's, it's,
it's biased towards expecting, towards being over optimistic. But
that seems, that seems to be a bias that
is, has been adaptively functional, uh, in our, in
our ancestral past.
Yeah, I, I mean, just to be fair here
in religion, there's also some things, not many, but
some things that are also at least slightly counterintuitive,
like what people refer to when they use the
term minimally counterintuitive ideas in the cognitive science of
religion. Like, I don't know, Jesus walking on water
or some of the miracles that he supposedly performed
that are described in the Bible, I mean, beings
that are part human beings, part other animals and
stuff like that. Just because apparently it is when
it comes to the ways our memory works, it
becomes more salient to have those ideas.
Absolutely. Yeah, those ideas. Pascal Boyer is brilliant researcher,
talks about you and others talk about counter minimally
counter of ideas and for sure, like just like,
um you know, science has, has made the, you
know, seemingly impossible, has shown us that it's, it's
true somehow and, and in ways that we can't
intuitively grasp. But nevertheless, it's, it's enabled all kinds
of technological advances. So religion also talks about impossible.
We, we're using Christianity as an example here. But
all um all kinds of things that we normally
regard as impossible, virgin birth and resurrection, et cetera,
the things you mentioned. And I think in the
case of religion, it's often, I, I see that
is kind of different because it's, I, I see
those as costly signals of your, of your religious
devotion. So if you're willing to suspend disbelief to
the point where you believe in things that are,
are in every, any other context would be seen
as impossible. Well, that's a sign of your unquestioning
devotion. Um And I guess I'd, I'd step back
too and say often when you talk about you,
when you, when you tell people you're studying religion
or spirituality, um they immediately think of something like,
oh, you mean like the Catholic church or they
think some, some specific cultural manifestation or set of
beliefs. Um And what we're actually trying to get
at is not none of that we're trying to
get right to the core. And the reason I've,
I've used this term sometimes religious spirituality is because
we're, we're, we're looking at a level of, of
resolution to where those, those concepts are indistinguishable, religiosity,
spirituality. So at a, at a higher, at a
higher level, usually religion refers to sort of organized
religions, like being a member of a, of a,
of an institutionalized, you know, uh church or something.
Whereas spirituality can be more sort of individualistic or,
or much more like, um you know, you're not
necessarily affiliated with it organized organized way of understanding
the, the the universe in that way. But uh
what we're trying to get at really is what
is the cognitive core of, of when people talk
about religiosity and spirituality, what do they essentially mean
cognitively? So when we strip away all the cultural
layers, um we're really trying to get a, just
a, just the cognitive essence of, of religiosity. Yeah.
Uh And how does the cultural aspect get into
the picture here when it comes to religious spirituality?
Because of course, as I mentioned in the introduction,
you approach things zero through a bio cultural evolutionary
perspective and not just let's say an evolutionary psychological
perspective or a biological evolutionary perspective. So how does
the culture get into the picture here?
Yeah, that's a, that's a great question. So I
mean, my background in evolutionary psychology means that I
was, you know, my phd advisors were were to
be cosmetics who are sort of founders of this
modern field of, of evolutionary psychology, which they would
define sort of the U CS B way is
of defining it is, is looking at what would
be genetically encoded cognitive information processing mechanisms um that
are that are, it's trying to arrive at a
very precise definition of human nature as a as
as the as in the brain mind is a
bundle of these, of these adaptations. Um So they're
talking very much about sort of the genetically encoded,
you know, psychological mechanisms, mechanisms Um And so I
think initially when I was trying to look at
religion, I kind of, I am a little, you
know, that's, that's my preferred approach too. Um, BUT
I wanted, I started to realize that there's, there
is a lot of, you know, uh significant cultural
varia cross cultural variation in how these religious, um,
uh, these religious pres. Uh, SORRY, I, I would
say ways of looking at the world are expressed.
Um And I didn't want to have to be
in the position of where I was claiming that
what we're saying could be an adaptive function of
religiosity is necessarily, you get that you're necessarily going
to find it, say hunter gatherer societies all over
the world, mainly because the data we've been collecting
hasn't been from hunter gatherer societies. So I wanted
to be a bit more agnostic about whether this
is, um you know, the extent to which these
are just sort of raw psychological adaptations expressing themselves
in the same way around the world and in
all types of societies versus, you know, again, uh
they could be elaborated culturally in different ways. Um
And some cultural manifestations of these, these uh uh
sort of underlying adaptations for religiosity, some of them
might be more effective than others at solving the
problems or sort of satisfying the motives that, that,
that these adaptations ancestrally um satisfied for people. So
I use the term bicultural, I guess maybe an
analogy would be helpful. So if you think about,
so sometimes people think about, ok, there's biological evolution,
there's cultural evolution and these things are sort of,
you have to take a side and there are
alternative types of explanations and partly that's, I think
political because, uh, you have, you know, people with
their preferred approach is competing for journal pages with
other people they see as the different faction. And
so I don't, I don't buy into any of
that. Actually, I think, you know, the, the kinds
of behaviors you'd expect to evolve are the ones
that are going to be most consistent with, both
with, with biological evolution and also cultural evolution. Um
And I see like cultural behavior and, and cultural
evolution again as an elaboration or exaggeration and amplification
of underlying psychological adaptation. So if you think about
a candy, like skittles, these little like fruit flavored
candies that are kind of like fruit, except every
aspect of fruit that appeals to, to our evolved
psychology has just turned up to 11. You know,
so really like the really, really sweet or really,
really sour or really, you know, tangy and the
colors are just, they, they're really, really bright and
it's sort of pushing all those buttons that makes
a fruit appealing to our evolved psychology and just
kind of ramping them up. And so much of
culture is like that, you know, it's, it's not
sort of overriding our, our evolved psychology. It's actually
allowing us, it's an expression of it and often
kind of a, an exaggeration of it. Um So
that's why I call it bio cultural uh is
because I think certainly at, at, at root, um,
you're, you're working with, you know, we're working with
these evolved adaptations. Um BUT then different cultural forms,
different cultural manifestations might uh have elaborated on those
in, in, in different ways. So, you know, maybe
monotheism, for example, is a particularly effective way of
solving some of these problems that these adaptations originally
evolved to solve. Uh Or maybe it's not, I
mean, maybe maybe a more, less agentic view of,
of, of God like Buddhism say is, is, is
more effective. So I want to leave that room
for cultural differences probably because they obviously exist and
um you don't want to deny something that's obviously
true.
Uh And from an evolutionary perspective, what would you
say are perhaps some of the main benefits of
religion, particularly the ones that have the fitness payoffs?
Yeah. Um Well, to answer that, just to give
you a little bit of a, you probably already
have a good understanding of this. Maybe for listeners
um in evolution approaches of religion, uh this is
a bit of a oversimplification but they've tended to
fall in, in two camps and one camp. And
probably the, I would say like the, the, the
the predominant one is, has seen religious explains religiosity
as a of adaptations for social cognition like, you
know, theory of mind, our abilities to read, to
read minds of other, other people, other other animals
uh agency detection. So these, these mechanisms associated with
social cognition um are sort of we just one
way to think about it is we just turn
them towards the universe at large. And so a
way to think about God is simply we take
our theory of mind, you know, attributing intentions and
agency and um emotions to other people and we
just sort of turn it towards the universe at
large is what Jesse Barring is called the existential
theory of mind. Um And so a lot of
like Pascal Boyer and others of Justin Barrett, you
know, see religious thinking as a byproduct's for social
cognition. Um And then there's another camp that says,
well, they think there's probably some adaptive aspects to
religious thinking and these tend to have to do
with cooper social coordinations and, and broadly Cooper and
that can be cooperated at the level of the
individual, like, like my, my colleague, Dominic Johnson has
written a book about uh God is watching you
about how uh religious ideas about punitive deities sort
of make us more allow us to cooper more
adaptively. Um Or, you know, the idea that whole
cultures benefit from, from religious um belief systems that
enhance co-operation and, and, and coordinations within groups that
then allow them to spread by a conquest or
because they're imitated by other groups to give them
some political advantage. Uh So it's sort of like
you choose, you're, if you're, if it's a doubt,
if you want to go to the sort of
extended that adaptation, you say it's cooper operation or,
or otherwise you say it's a by product. And
our approach has been to sort of say there's
this whole other uh huge literature on, you know,
the relationship between religiosity and health, basically physical mental
health. Um And most of this research is not
explicitly evolutionary hasn't been sort of evolutionary. So it's
a little bit strange because so it's a fairly
well documented positive relationship between religiosity and physical and
mental health. Mostly it's conducted in western societies. But,
but still, it's sort of an obvious, it raises
the question of, well, you know, could this have,
could, could this be relevant to an evolutionary understanding
if there are these connections to health and survival?
I mean, literally survival and longevity. Um And so
that, that is the approach we've, we've been taking
more is looking at what is how, how from
an evolutionary perspective, can we, can we try and
explain this relationship? And also like, what are the
mediating psychological variables that could help explain sort of
religious thinking? Um Then, and then that leads to,
to in better physical and mental health. Uh What
or what is sometimes referred to as well being.
Um And uh yeah, so, I mean, that's been,
I think the main differences in our approach is
we're trying to come up with a, a more
satisfying evolutionary explanation that that doesn't leave out this
kind of potentially quite important part of the explanation.
And then also integrates these sort of non evolutionary
approaches with these evolutionary approaches which for whatever reason,
have tended to focus on cooper operation and then
the by product idea.
So uh I want to connect or try to
connect all of this to an idea that you
proposed in your work that you called universal Darwinism.
But just before we get into that, since we've
already talked here about the main benefits of religion
and also how it has some fitness payoffs. Do
you think that by studying uh religion or religious
spirituality from an evolutionary perspective and really getting a
better understanding of uh the benefits we get from
it and how we get them, we could apply
these to secular societies and get the same sorts
of individual and social benefits uh without the religious
aspect to them or not.
That's a, that's a great question. Um I would
say that, ok, so this is also sort of
more about the state of the field. But when,
when most social scientists usually not coming from an
explicitly evolutionary perspective, when they've tried to explain this
positive relationship between religiosity and health, it's usually in
terms of social support. Um So religious people, like
if they are members of congregations or, or whatever,
they they, they tend to have these religious communities
that are good sources of social support. And we
know that social support is good for your health.
Not, it doesn't have to be religious. So there's
nothing uniquely, uh nothing unique about religion in this
regard in terms of explaining its relationship with health.
It's simply, it's a good, a good gives you
access to a community of social support. Um And
uh if that were true, then I would say
the answer to your question about, could we have
a secular society? Uh That sort of solved all
those problems without sort of veering into this religiosity
worldview? I would say, yeah, uh as long as
we can give people access to that kind of
social support. Um And yeah, that was, that was
an approach I was taking a few years ago
and I published a study on that and looking
at secular congregations, particularly the, the Sunday Assembly, which
is kind of been, they don't call themselves this,
but uh probably the most easiest way to explain
it. It's like an atheist church um that started
here in London, that kind of spread all over
the world. Um So I think that, and I
do think that is part of the explanation for
why religion has positive associations with health and social
support. But I think there's a lot more to
it. I think there is some, there are things
that are unique about religious, not behavior like social
behavior but religious belief per se. Um That, that
I think it would be considered pretty uniquely religious.
Um And I, I'm not trying to be cagey
about this. I'll just say like, what I, what,
what we think it is is this belief that
there's a higher plan, that one's life is following
the high, higher plan. So a plan that has
been uh created by some kind of higher power
or powers And we've tried to define it in
a way that is uh universal. So we're talking
about at least for all major world religions. Um
THIS, we needed, we needed a definition that would
apply equally well to say monotheistic abrahamic religions or,
or Buddhism or Hinduism or indeed sort of informal
spirituality uh where you people say, uh even like
reading your horoscope um or saying like, oh the
universe is trying to tell me something. I'm looking
for a sign in a kind of informal spiritual
way. Um So we're trying to come up with
the definition of religiosity slash spirituality that would apply
across religions. And what we landed on was this
sort of belief in a higher plan. Um Because
that is, and we've done a lot of research
since then, that, that, that supports this idea that
um it is a, it's very hard to define
sort of religiosity or religious belief. People think it
sounds easy, but then you realize what are you
actually talking about? So we were just focusing on
what is the cognitively, what do all of these
things we call religion? What do they have in
common as a, as an essential belief that it
makes them unique? And I think it would be
this belief in a higher plan that your life
is following this, this plan. That is, and it's,
it's, you know, invariably it's a benevolent plan, at
least benevolent with respect to you yourself and your
own welfare, not necessarily with respect to everybody else.
They might die in the, you know, the apocalypse,
but you're gonna be, you're gonna be ok. Um
So it has to do with this idea that
this plan is, is, is, has been devised by
some kind of higher power or powers, not necessarily
a God, but some kind of power. Um And
it's, it's ultimately consistent with your long term welfare.
Ok. So that serves as that. Well, first of
all, that's a uniquely religious idea. I don't know
of any sort of scientific ideas that, I mean,
you can, I know of some sort of theoretical
ones that we don't have yet have this sort
of a technology to test. We don't have the
ability to, uh, you know, produce empirical evidence one
way or the other. So I think there are
scientific ideas for how that that could happen in
theory, but they're not widely accepted hardly any, you
know, nobody really believes them. Uh And any to
the extent that they believe in religious religious beliefs.
So that is what I think is probably the
unique aspect of what we call religion, spirituality, uh
cross culturally that sets it apart. And it makes
it uniquely useful to people as a kind of
repository or a foundation for optimism and sense of
purpose because it really can people, people do find
it useful for uh amplifying, especially in times of
where you might be, you might be, uh you
know, uh tempted to give up, sort of throw
in the towel because you don't think you're going
to succeed if people can sort of say no,
you know, there's this, this is part of a
higher plan and I have this, this is not
just my purpose, this is a purpose shared with
this higher power. I think that can make people
more resilient and more persistent and in the pursuit
of goals and, and it becomes a self fulfilling
prophecy uh where, whereby uh just the fact that
you, you don't give up and that you are,
you, you're striving for these goals more intensely. It's
that, that, that um motivation itself makes, makes you
more likely to achieve the goal,
right? So, tell us now about this idea of
universal Darwinism. What do you mean uh by it
basically? Yeah, I mean, so a few years ago
when I was sort of looking for, for new
sources of inspiration. Uh Well, years ago I read
this book called The Life of the cosmos by
a physicist named Lee Smolen that talks about um
the multiverse and how the the types of universes
that are going to be most common in the
multiverse are gonna be those that reproduce most prolifically
and successfully. And talks about black holes is basically
the reproductive system of the universe. So, um that's
one way of thinking about universal Darwinism is it's
the basic ideas of just, you know, the, the
uh the kind of orderly forms that exist in
the universe around us are those which have almost
by, well, pretty much by definition. Um YOU know,
found ways to combat the second law of thermodynamics.
You know, the, the the the the tendency towards
of isolated systems to towards increased entropy, increased disorder.
Um And so the kinds of orderly systems we
we observe all around us are, are all examples
of systems that have temporarily at least found ways
to kind of subvert circumvent that the second law
of thermodynamics. And that's basically what, what universal Darwinism
is. It's, it's, it's, it's sort of saying that
the, the principles um or the the processes that
we can observe in, in biological evolution in a
more abstract way are operating the universe is basically
saturated. The multiverse is saturated with these same kind
of processes. And really what it's about is second
law of thermodynamics. OK. So this increased sort of
relentless march towards entropy and then um processes that
uh have of order of, of, of, of com
sometimes complex order that have found ways to, to
subvert this law. Um And the kind of supreme
example of uh complex organization is is life and,
and you know, adaptations and then the, the the
organisms that are composed of these adaptations that are
bundles of these adaptations. These are the least entropic,
I mean, Lee Moen himself says this in his
book that these are the the least entropic entities
in the universe. Um And there's a formal definition
for that, just meaning like if you swapped out
uh say cells from one part of your body,
say your liver and you exchange it with neurons,
um you're gonna start, you're gonna start to interfere
with the ability of that system to exist, you're
gonna hasten its, its, its uh path, you know,
down towards entropy. Um And so by that definition,
like living living organisms are the, the, the most
sort of the least entropic systems um that we
know of. So I think it, it's very, it's
helpful in understanding adaptation and in understanding why adaptation
is so important. Um And, and understanding that, you
know, or um complex organizational complexity is the hallmark
of of selection. So basically, you have, you know,
second law of thermodynamics, then you have kinds of
selective processes that this this destructive process that, that
creates entropy is simultaneously responsible for creating the order
because it's like everything that can slip through its
net um becomes, becomes examples of, of, of orderly
systems. Um And yeah, I thought it's, um and
it really just sort of relates to our understanding
of the universe in a very deep, deep level.
So, um I, and I gotta, I gotta give
credit to a friend of mine named John Campbell
who was an independent scholar, um who I kind
of stumbled across, um who wrote some really excellent
books. Uh Darwin does Physics um and some other
books and he, he passed away a couple of
years ago. But um I, I thought he just
had some really brilliant ideas that influenced me, me
a lot. And we, we published together and one
of his kind of anecdotes that really, I thought
was really the most compelling was talking about sort
of the founder of information theory, Claude Shannon. Um
And in the forties, when he was coming up
with information theory, he was trying to define and
uh information and, and knowledge um mathematically and then
sort of the, the opposite of it is what
he called ignorance. Um And he was asking Von
Neumann, the famous mathematician when he showed him his,
his mathematical formula for ignorance. And he wasn't sure
whether he should call it ignorance, what he should
call it. And, and, and Von Neuman said, we'll
just call it entropy because it's mathematically equivalent to
entropy. And so this, this mathematical equivalence of knowledge
and information with uh with entropy. And then by
the same token, um I'm sorry, with ignorance, ignorance,
uh The absence of knowledge, ignorance is equivalent to
entropy. And by the same token adaptation is equivalent
to knowledge, it's sort of, it's knowledge about what
it takes to, to persist in one's environment.
But do you think that this idea of universal
Darwinism and life and Darwinian selection as a sort
of anti anthropic process would have implications beyond science?
I mean, as to how we think about existence
and life more specifically, do you think that it
would have potentially, I don't know, existential implications or
not?
I mean, I think absolutely like down the road.
Um I mean, I see no limitations on what,
you know, as long as we can avoid extinction
as, as a species, I think human knowledge is
just gonna, so I'm not gonna, you know, take
anything off the table and in, in terms of
um how we could use this understanding um to
answer sort of existential questions that were presently just
incapable of under understanding. Um But I also acknowledge
that there's a lot that we just, we are
aren't capable of understanding. I think where it's become
useful for me in the study of religion is
in thinking about uh ideas about function. Um SO
adaptations have functions and, and, and, and uh their
function is to basically withstand the second law of
thermodynamics is to withstand the forces of entropy. Um
And then thinking about sort of Lee Mullen's idea
about function at this higher level, right, at this,
at this multiverse level, with black holes have this
function of allowing rep uh universes to reproduce. And
then it, you know, it just occurring to me
increasingly that it seemed increasingly like that was what
religious, what we call religious thinking. That's what it's
doing. It's taking this, this idea of function or
purpose, um uh and just applying it to a
level higher and saying it's not just obviously organisms
have purposes, you know, they're hungry and they want
to eat or whatever. Um But what if our
universe has a purpose or what? If not just
my life, not, not, I don't just have purposes
in my own life. What if life itself, like
the evolutionary process has some higher purpose? Um And
it, it, it, first of all, it made me
think that's sort of what that's, that's essentially, I
think what religion is doing. It's, it's, it's moving
that level of evolved purpose or function just up,
up a level to a level we don't have
access to for them by and large, you know,
in terms of collecting empirical data, which I think
takes it out of the realm of scientific uh
scientific knowledge. So it, it's, it's not a competing
way of, I don't see it as a way
of a competing way of understanding the world. It's
a way of understanding the world for like questions
that we don't have the ability to answer empirically,
but they're still very important to us. Um And
for me, so I think just thinking about this
um purpose of this higher level helped me arrive
at this definition of religiosity, spirituality. Like that's, that's
a pretty good working definition of religion, psychologically, it's
this idea of purpose at a higher level. Um
So, yeah, I think, I think it has some
kind of limited utility in that regard for now.
I think just because we don't have the ability
to test these ideas right now, the practical scientific
u utility is, is limited.
So let me ask you about one last topic
slash question because there's at least one more domain
that religion usually deals with that from a more
scientific perspective. I mean, it's a, it's a little
bit more complicated to really make a move from
describing what the world is or what the world
looks like. Uh uh uh GOING from that to
what we should do, what we ought to do.
That is the more moral domain going from the
descriptive to the prescriptive. But do you think then
from an evolutionary perspective, there's uh I mean that
we could derive moral principles from this kind of
uh view in science? I mean, is there, for
example, since from an evolutionary perspective, at the end
of the day, it all, it all boils down
to our ability to reproduce or not reproduce, I
mean, to our fitness, do you think that there's,
for example, any moral obligation for us to, uh,
reproduce and to promote future human evolution or not.
Well, um, I mean, the short answer, if you're
talking about can evolutionary knowledge or scientific knowledge tell
us what our morals should be. I, I'd say
no. Um, PRETTY unequivocally. No. Um, I think that's
a road that it's, it's for sure, a double
edged swords. Um, AND I also just don't think
I can't see how it, it could really be
true. I mean, I, I think it could tell
us, you know, why we might be interested in,
in, in, you know, engaging the behaviors that were
associated with reproduction and survival in the past. But
it can't tell us anything about sort of what's
right or wrong. I think, you know, certainly not.
Sometimes it, people have, I think, abused evolutionary knowledge
and saying this or that is natural or unnatural.
Um, AND to me that distinction makes no sense.
Uh, FIRST of all, because what if it's not
natural, then what is it? I mean, that implies
there's some, something else like there's some supernatural realm
or, or, and I just think that's, uh, so
short answer is I do not think, II, I
believe that the naturalistic fallacy is in fact a
fallacy. And, um, I don't, I certainly don't look
to, I, I do think this idea is very
hard. It's, people are, it, it's very hard to
like excise it from people's understanding and, and there's
a tendency of humans who want to do that
and to say that to think that if you're
calling something into adaptation, that somehow elevates it morally,
um which I think is really closer to being
wro wrong than right. Because, you know, so many
of our most valued uh cultural creations are byproduct's
of, of adaptations. And to say something is a
byproduct's in no way to sort of demote it
and say it's less natural. I mean, ma mathematics
and, you know, uh uh so much of our
art and culture and technology and transportation, all of
these things that make our lives. Well, I think
on balance probably, probably, well, at least we, we
try and use them to make our lives more
enjoyable and livable and they're all by products and
that doesn't mean they're immoral. Um So I, the
short answer is no, I don't think you can
derive morality from evolution. I any more than you
can from geology or chemistry or I think it's
just a way of, you know, again, generating objective
knowledge about human nature. And just, II, I thought
you might be asking what about the connection between
religion and morality? And I don't think there's any
necessary connection there either. I mean, actually when you
talk about, you know, when we, we sort of
retrospectively label uh what we call in hunter gatherer
societies, we call it religious beliefs, religious behavior, of
course, to them, it's just the way they see
the world, they don't distinguish, they don't call it
religion. They just think this is the way the
world we, we think the world is. Um, BUT
oftentimes it has no explicit ties to morality. Um
And this connection with morality I think is more
of AAA, culturally evolved thing. Um Which kind of
makes sense because religion and culturally has become such
a powerful kind of uh social force that if
people have a moral agenda, they're gonna wanna loop
it, tie it in to, to religion just to
sort of reinforce it. And, but I don't think
there's any necessary connection. Again. I think the sort
of the essence of religiosity is just simply this
belief in a higher plan. And it has, it's,
I think Steven Pinker, was it? Well, they call
it kind of a, it's like a, a dust
bunny, like intellectual, dust bunny. Um I'm not sure
if he was talking about religion this way, but
it's, it, it, it sort of collects all this,
all this baggage, you know, like morality and, and,
and uh people's ideas about sin and, and what's
right and wrong and, and really, in essence, it's,
it's, it's not about that. It's just about believing
that there's a higher plan in your life is
somehow following this higher plan.
Great. So before we go, would you like to
tell the audience what are the kinds of work
you're doing at the moment what you're going to
be working on in the near future? And does
it, uh have anything to do with religious spirituality
or are you moving on to other sorts of
topics?
Uh, WELL, it does have to do with religio
spirituality and I'll just, I'll just call it religiosity.
But, uh, and so we have, for the past
few years, Dominic Johnson and I have been coding
a project funded by Templeton Religion Trust and is
a fund uh called the Evolution of Science and
religion is mean making systems. So it's mainly a
reg granting program. We've, we, we funded other projects
uh looking at religion and science. And we've also
been conducting our own research. Um And as far
as our own research goes, the main focus has
been, well, we've, we've completed a big cross cultural
study. So all major religions, 54 countries, uh 39
languages, six continents. So a truly cross cultural study
over 55,000 participants. Um And, you know, we, we
have tried to define religion, come up with a
way of defining religiosity in a, in a psychologically,
in a way that would, that would work cross
culturally. So that's where that sort of belief in
a higher plan measure that we devise, that's where
it came from. And then trying to test it
against these alternate alternative hypotheses about um whether, you
know, belief in a higher plan, uh this construct
that we've, we've devised, whether it's a better predictor
of optimism and sense of purpose or what we
call these sort of motive motivating outlooks, this motivational
mechanisms, whether it's a better predictor of those compared
to religious social support, which is, as I mentioned,
this kind of a pretty, pretty, pretty, probably the,
the uh conventional wisdom about the link between uh
religiosity and well being. And then also there's been
some other ideas about, well, maybe the links between
religious belief and well being have more to do
with this just a belief system in general and
not a religious one per se. And so some,
some very interesting work suggesting that uh belief in
science and what's called like scientific faith could produce
the same sorts of, of uh you know, positive
outcomes with well being. Um So we also tested
that we looked at sort of scientific belief and
compared it and we, and, and, and um and
looking at a sort of multi multilevel regression models
that allow us to um partial out the, the
variant and, and well, well being that's explained by
belief and I are plan versus religious social support
versus scientific belief. Um And we've started publishing uh
those results. Um And uh we are in the
verge of publishing the rest but has basically found
that there's pretty cross cultural support for the belief
in the higher plan tends to be stronger and
more consistent than for either of those alternative hypotheses.
But that's not to sort of throw shade on
those alternatives because I think they're, they're, they're good,
they're plausible. We didn't want, we wanted to test
them because we thought they were good ideas and
they were plausible ideas. Um, NOT because we wanted
to, you know, have strong men. So, um, actually
the evidence that we found cross culturally, it supports
all three of those, those hypotheses or those, those,
those approaches. But I mean, the belief in a
higher plan did tend to get more consistent and,
and I'd say stronger support, uh uh overall
great. And if people are interested, where can they
find you when you work on the internet?
Yeah, I mean, a lot of the, the, uh
religion work has been sort of, uh, we've been
sort of working on it for years and now
we're ready to publish. And so we have a
paper, well, we have a special issue, Dominic Johnson
and I are co editing a special issue of
the journal Religion Brain and Behavior that's going to,
we're going to have an article on that and,
uh that, that will be forthcoming in a few
months. I'm not exactly sure when, uh but it's
also going to have about, I think eight other
articles by some of our re grantees who are
also doing research on the same, on the same
program. Uh And then hopefully within also within a
few months, we're going to publish our sort of
flagship study from this our flagship manuscript based on
this cross cultural study that is where we're comparing
um belief in a higher plan to religious social
support and belief in science. But the one coming
out in religion, brain and behavior um takes a
different angle. It looks at the extent to which
religious belief and scientific belief are seen as compatible
or not in different regions of the world. And
so we're very used to thinking of them as
incompatible in western societies. And they are, I mean,
people in the sense that the more you believe
in, in uh belief in a higher plan, the
less you, you the lower is your scientific faith.
Um But it's not true in and outside of
uh sort of North and South American, sort of
historically Christian societies and European societies. Uh It's not
the case in, in Africa and Asia, uh especially
Hinduism, they actually positively correlated. So faith in science
and, and, and, and belief in our plan. So,
and we found that the extent to which the
more compatible these two belief systems are, uh the
more each beli belief system is respectively independently associated
with well being. So, in other words, in cultures
where they're seen as more compatible, um the associations
with belief in a higher plan and well being
and the associations with belief in science and well
being are both stronger. So there's actually they're kind
of operating, seeming seem to be operating synergistically as
opposed to Um So if you could somehow, you
know, uh hit upon uh a belief system that
allows you to kind of extract the, the best
of both. Um So it allows you to kind
of have religious beliefs but, but they don't conflict
with or undermine belief in science. Um But still
allow you to kind of have the, the benefits
in terms of the optimism and sense of purpose
without, without, without forfeiting scientific knowledge that that really
could be the best of both worlds. Um And
we're not prescribing anything we're not saying of, of
course, we're not saying anybody should go out and
join a religion or anything like that. We're just,
we're just reporting these results that um there does,
there does seem to be some, some benefits to
well being from, from both kinds of belief systems
um that I think are, are, are worthy of
further investigations, especially because these aspects of well being
we're talking about are, are they, they're seen as
motivational mechanisms. So they have this evolutionary function in
terms of encouraging striving and enhanced goal achievement, but
also their core components of good mental health. So
if you think about the sort of a very
depressed person is going to be very low in
optimism and low in sort of sense of purpose.
And there's kind of this global public health crisis
at the moment in terms of depression. And it's
one of the most significant public health problems in
the world. And uh this is one way of,
of, of addressing that, that problem. Um So we
hope that there will be some applied value eventually.
Um You know, once we've, these are just initial
studies, we haven't established causation. And so there's a
lot of work to be done. But we can
imagine down the road that there could be, I
think some significant applied value as well.
Great. So Michael, thank you so much again for
taking the time to come on the show. It's
been a real pleasure to talk with you. Thanks
Ricardo. It's great to be here. Thanks again for
inviting me and thanks for your awesome podcast. It's,
it's, it's a really unique and I think a
great public service. So thank you.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno,
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitting
Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mar Nevs calling in Hobel, Governor Mikel Stormer,
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Hall, her
Ma J and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel
K Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel s friends,
David Sloan Wilson Yaar, Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter,
Romani Charlotte, Bli Nicole Barba Adam Hunt, Pavlo Stassi
Nale medicine, Gary G Almansa Zal Ari and YPJ
Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry
Franca Lati Gilon Cortez or Scott Zachary ftdw Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke Loi, Georgio Theophano,
Chris Williams and Peter Wo David Williams Di A
Costa, Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey, Junior, Old Ebon, Starry
Michael Bailey, then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff
mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor
Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica.
A week in the Brendan Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley
Man, George Katis Valentine Steinman, Perlis, Kate Van Goler.
Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular
Jer Urla. Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins of
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A special
thanks to my producers these our web, Jim Frank
Lucani. Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik,
Muller Thomas Trumble Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlman,
Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to my
executive producers Matthew Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and
Rosie. Thank you for all.